welcome everybody to this call between
Joe and dr. Bessel Vander Kolk
MD so this call is hosted by view which
is a transformative education leadership
development and corporate culture change
company new stands for vulnerability and
partiality empathy and wonder a state of
mind that we trained as a beginning
first step to relating to ourselves and
others with deeper love and kindness
view takes a three pronged approach with
the intellectual emotional and nervous
system to work on limiting beliefs and
it's really about lowering resistance to
the experience that's available in every
moment in a container of love moving
forward we will be focused on an
intensive year-long program for senior
leaders and organizational culture
change programs prior to founding view
Joe was a VC investor and foundation
managing director both of which focused
on companies and organizations with the
mission to raise consciousness whether
it was increasing social emotional
fluidity in children or conscious
parenting there was a range but it was
all focused on how can we increase the
holistic well-being of children and
adults and for our guests
we have the introduction of dr. Bessel
Vander Kolk MD who were very privileged
to have and has spent his whole career
studying how children and adults adapt
to traumatic experiences and has
translated his emerging findings from
neuroscience and attachment research to
develop and study a range of potentially
effective treatments for traumatic
stress in children and adults he is the
author of the body keeps a score our own
recommended reading that we do as part
of our 18-month course so everyone who's
attended the viewer shakers program has
read your book on this call and his
efforts have led to the establishment of
the National Child traumatic stress
Network a congressionally mandated
initiative and now funds approximately
Oh
least supplies new treatment man the
doctor a treatment center a research lab
and numerous trainings worldwide for a
range of individuals so with that let's
start the call between you two and we're
super excited and looking forward to the
call today and I'll stop my video so
people will only be able to see YouTube
from from now on enjoy good good thank
you thank you Mina thanks for coming by
so I really appreciate you taking the
time with us let's start up just with
the question and when you think about
trauma there's something to let's say
there's this range of trauma and one
side is like beating daily and molested
weekly trauma for a child and the other
side of trauma would be the far end
might be something like heavily
criticized by a parent or not picked up
as a two-year-old consistently when they
were scared and being told you have to
be tough in this world right where do
you draw the line on what trauma is and
and yeah well I don't think you can draw
a line of you can it's not the binary
issue now but but I think it's very
important and has been of increasing
concern to me is that you know these are
all historical developments they were
all part of the culture and part of our
political culture and so we started off
looking at trauma through the eyes of
Vietnam veterans and what's interesting
is that up to then child abuse basically
didn't exist rape didn't exist domestic
violence didn't exist just amazing how
until the middle 80s or something this
whole issue was completely not being
looked at and then we got Tom and we
talked about it as an extraordinary
event that's outside of human usually
human experience and in the events and
then so it became like
something terrible happens it changes
you and turned out it mostly since up
she was served wrong but here we have
served run with him anyway and that term
is about an event and these events
happen sometimes in car accident wait
did they occur Yorker feign really
actually in my practice that's not the
overwhelming number people I see but
because we got this PTSD diagnosis we
organized our thinking around and events
and that really messed up the other
piece that is intriguing here is that
this was all developed in the context of
the u.s. being the largest war machine
since the Roman Empire basically and our
national treasure being devoted to
arming our troops is any people cross
and so our money and our thinking goes
into veterans and it's a grown-up man
who get messed up in our culture of war
making but this is to actually issues
their veterans are very small minority
of traumatized people in most men people
who could traverse as guitarist at home
by their own caregivers this is sort of
an extraneous issue and the other thing
is that when these veterans came to see
us originally their chief complaint was
I have become a monster nobody is safe
with me
I blow up at my kids my wife who helped
me survive Vietnam by sending me letters
and being taken care of it I have no
feelings for her I'd beat her up and
I've become this monstrous person but
because of politics
we had to link this monstrousness to the
war and we said all the big issue is the
memory about him or about events but
that is a clinical move it's not a
scientific move because the real issue
that you see is that people have a hard
time engaging with people having having
a hard time understanding other people
of you be part of synchronicity with
other human beings
and that's really where the main problem
is but we kept going but it's the events
and now people can I love the research
and newspaper article said if we just
make them invent go away everything's
going to be okay but that's a complete
misunderstanding because it's about
these appearances change who you are
they change how you see the world so
that's one aspect the second piece is in
the political process again when we put
his diagnosis together we were very
aware that a lot had happened to these
people before he went to the war but we
had in Kansas : diagnosis it's a DSM so
he said no it has nothing to do with
past it's all about seeing your best
friend being blown up and horrible and
it was horrible but we already sir
smelled out these guys have pre-existing
histories of childhood abuse and neglect
which we serve pretty well guests had
more to do with the eventual sanitation
but they ignored that and then as we
have come to to move around in the last
three to five years we understand that
the biggest issue actually is how you
get taken care of by your parents which
is not about trauma it's about how you
get seen and whether you're known and
ready have a voice and well if you cry
somebody says oh honey let's let's take
care of you or beat you up it says shut
up
I'll give you something cry about it so
we now have two parallel issues that are
conflated with each other one is the
whole attachment system and how you deal
with other people other people deal with
you and how you see yourself in the
context of other people which is one
dimension and the other dimension is
that something terrible is happens that
changes your knowledge II to be always
be on the alert for danger because that
event may come back to you but these are
a lot of separate experiences and so
what the research shows although most
people don't talk about it is that the
security of the attachments thing is the
biggest
issue now at least so many events are
secondary and but of course if you have
long problematic attachment issues you
become much more likely to get hurt in
the context of other human beings
that's sir but that becomes a secondary
issue yeah the the question I have on
that is let's say you have not a cute
piece of trauma trauma what there are
certain things that happen that are
pretty consistent and is people are
living in that moment even when that
moments no longer existing there's a
physical response there there even
mapping I would call it in our world we
call it mapping where they're kind of
manipulating attracting and proving this
reality yep it's a very important point
actually yeah and if a mysterious point
actually yeah I called his addiction to
trauma yes and somehow the thing that's
most terrifying also becomes the most
meaningful in your life yes it's a huge
issue yes right yeah that's really like
you talked about it yeah yeah that's our
work and I find that that exact same
thing happens when you're dealing with
attachment the trauma that happens from
lack of attachment in the early then
let's say if a person has been taught
that love is criticism they go around
manipulating the world attracting
critical people proving that love is
criticism that you're hearing criticism
when it doesn't actually happen and I'm
wondering it yeah okay good
yeah no please you have a good thought I
want to hear it well my association is
I've always also been puzzled by this
addiction to trauma issue and my great
revelation came when I read some piece
of that research reading founded by
bunch of rats who were in a very
pleasant swarm and food environment
another bunch of rats who were starved
and noisy and miserable and they put
them together in a common environment
and then he did nasty things to them and
the rest who went to came from safe
environments went to safe places and the
best who came from
bad environments been back to the bad
place yeah so people choose what's
familiar or what's safe yes yeah the
story the story I tell about this I mean
I don't know if the research but the
story that I tell is that like our
organism is a is looking for homeostasis
again and so there are some oceans that
they weren't allowed to feel in those
moments of trauma and if you allow them
to feel what's the body actually allows
and looks boards to those emotions that
are being held back then they no longer
are attracted to the trauma that's what
I've seen is that if somebody yeah
they'll say be good yeah if somebody is
I'll give you a less making concrete
somebody had an emotional abandonment by
their parents in that process there was
a deep feeling of aloneness and out of
control that they couldn't feel because
if they did would be total chaos is a
five or ten year old if they get to a
point where they can look forward to
that emotion that underlying emotion and
actually invite it and feel it and
process it in a container particularly
in a container of love then that's the
moment they stop attracting or going
towards the the that same trauma in
their life they stop being attracted to
and stop inviting into their lives
people who will emotionally abandon them
you see what's the original lead gets
satisfied once the emotion gets balanced
fully felt right so there's an emotion
of basically hey this person who's
opposed care of me isn't and the sadness
and helplessness of that if it's felt
and and loved I would say look forward
to like yeah or like the child never was
then it vanished shifts that's what I
deal with it yeah in in our second
romantic work is to sort of become that
10 year old kid yes and to feel the
feelings and to put
your father or your mother out there in
space and to say you've never paid
attention to me or you just kept putting
me down that you choose somebody to be
an ideal parents yes and who who holds
you and you feel like you're ten years
old and it says if I be never even ten
years old I will repaint attention to
you I would have read your spare time
stories every night and then you get the
imprint of oh that's what it feels like
you really get the momentary visceral
satisfaction of that of that emptiness
that Khepri feeling over one yeah and I
think this very seriously I mean you
need to have a sense in your body of
what it's like to feel that hunger
satisfied or that's to know how it can
be differently yeah and I think our
biggest challenge is how do you get that
into people's bodies yes yeah exactly
alternative reality right yeah and can
you speak a little bit about complex
PTSD is kind of there's now a book on it
and how do you how do you conceive of
this when you think you know well
complex PTSD is this attachment trauma
issue combined with each other and it
meanders have been so very much from the
very beginning the moment that we got
the PTSD diagnosis in Judy Herman and I
started to talk about yeah but it's more
complex and if you're were abused and
neglected as a kid you have all these
issues about self-esteem and your body
gets very affected and you get all these
illnesses
you can always your problems and that's
complex PTSD and when Judy first wrote
about it yeah I did say I did research
on it and we always talked about in the
major about the semantic aspects and the
immunological aspects when Judy first
talks about it that sort of body piece
was left out still yeah our research has
always said if you're early on you get
neglected abused it changes the hallways
your whole organism response the
environments
yeah yeah there's a you know the
research that shows that aces will
increase heart attack rates and and
dilates and all that um I have a
question for you howdy
how do you how do you define the
difference between managing PTSD and
healing it I I think it's a very
important person actually and I think
but they see people do in academic type
research is to manage how the outcome
measure is where the PTSD symptoms are
less or rather still people still meet
criteria for PTSD and there's a certain
cutoff point and I make actually very
big deal out of no that's not the right
outcome criterion the work continues
people say it's over I used to be an
abused and neglected kid but now I feel
loved inside and so the issue is really
not how do we manage it and keep it on
the control the issue is how do we
resolve it and in very large number of
people's cases you can resolve it yeah
you can actually come into a court just
say you know Jesus loves me or whatever
the equivalent their offer is like I'm
in love push I mean yeah and so one of
the things that we talk about is that
the the the the trauma that's created in
relationship is best healed in
relationship and there's two forms of
that that can happen there's the
one-on-one of a doctor client and then
there's also a group of people and then
in that group they can there gonna be a
deep feeling of love and acceptance if
that's created that can do a lot of the
healing I'm curious what do you see the
differences between the one-on-one and
the group if you can really create a
container of love inside of that group
well I don't I also don't quite agree
with that the relationship is the one
thing that curious at trial
we won say one thing I would just say
it's very helpful in it but of course
the relationship is central and my taken
is although you know it's it's it's not
linear it's not black and white is that
in order to tell your story and to tease
it out and to really know what you went
through back there and the deeply feel
developed a sense of compassion for your
internal world I think the one on one
relationship where somebody is just
focused on you and you don't have to
worry about anybody else is pretty damn
important mmm
and I don't quite maybe you can do it
and really said seriously think maybe
you know how to do it in our soccer
drama stuff people do very deep work in
a group but you know sorry drama stuff
you also pay very deep attention to that
particular person's experience then the
group can be very powerful in helping it
but I think doing things in a group is
enormous ly important also to know that
this is our common fate it's part of a
human being that sometimes some of us
have been luckier than others is that
sometimes you feel unseen you feel
don't be gives a about you and you
feel like you need to be there for
somebody else enough for you and at the
end knowing that you're a member of the
human race and playing it out as a
member of human race is also terribly
important yeah yeah like I have a
question for you how do you define
because there's the reason I'm asking
the question is because there's a couple
modalities out there that talk about
awakening that's found at the bottom of
the trauma there's a Tibetan work and
there's also
lowens work also talks about this my
question for you before we even get into
that subject is how do you define
awakening what do you like what does
that mean to you from a psychological
perspective
that that it's not the not the language
that I use in any other ventures I am in
although when they think about it
I can see how people come to use that
word in some way yeah
and it's a word of that word what for me
means now having never heard it before
in this context is of really seeing
yourself with love compassion and saying
yes this creature who is me got terribly
hurt along the way
yeah but it wasn't that features fault
that creature just was at the wrong time
in the wrong place and I'll help to
execute that person who happens to be me
out of that situation
yeah I imagine that this awakening means
yeah yeah in some in the human
development research they talked about
awakening being a moment where the sense
of self shifts into Universal instead of
an individual turns into a universal I
think in other traditions awakening a
heart awakening would be described
exactly how you describe it that would
be called more of a head awakening and
but my curiosity is what's your
experience of working with people in
their trauma and that trauma is the key
that allows them to find is there
another way to find that deep amount of
self loved and outside of going through
the trauma what what you know it's a
question that has been around as long as
I have been in this field and I think
most of us would say most of the time
yes you need to go into the trauma and
yes you need to experience what's
happened to that kid or that person back
then but I'm not a hundred percent sure
of that yeah I think it's possible and
let's say one scenario could be like
adolescence is a amazing time when
brain is wide open and you can be a
terrible abuse and and hurts child and
if your first love in your life happens
to be a very loving person who makes you
feel like you're just a lovely wonderful
person who can share pleasure and
commitment and joy with you as teenagers
sometimes have the good luck to have
yeah then I think that experience at the
right time in the right place can be
decent we set the whole system without
having to revisit at all I could imagine
that that would be true for some people
yeah yeah yeah right yeah if basically
that that idea of Ben you are lovable
however getting is the thing that can
create this for people whether it's
through the trauma or not through the
trauma intentionally yeah but then it's
a question of what serves mental brain
stage are you in to allow this new stuff
to come into you aha unless this happens
to be a very good place for that to
happen
most of us when we get adults get pretty
rigidify and barely get into a state of
that openness although right now I main
research is on psychedelics actually is
also our state of mind in which all kind
of new stuff can come in at Knossos can
also do that but what we see in our
secondary research people go back into
their trauma wrap we have not seen
people in our research who have a
secondary experience and go into other
places and they deal with that I'm
always yeah one of the things that
happens in our work when we do the
week-long or the 18-month and the people
are deep is really common for people to
say I feel like I'm on that Allu
synergetic it's a really little thing
for people to say and they'll if it's a
big emotional process they'll think that
they feel like they're on ayahuasca if
it's then there's some processes where
they feel like it's MDMA and there's
some process really good mental
deconstruction process
they feel like LSD I wonder if you have
any theories as to why somebody who's
not on hallucinogenics would feel like
they're on hallucinogenics are you you
know one thing that one reservation area
bar DeBarge are the current interest in
psychedelics which i share is that
people can think oh I need to take a
pill or a drug in order to get in that
states yeah I think that's definitely
not true and you know I don't know the
details of your particular work like you
know I had experiences in my life also
away my mind was very open and new new
stuff came in in very profound ways and
they were never folk didn't ever involve
drugs actually yeah that's a they
involve your mind being open
you have a lot of state abase in your
brain okay things need to be changed in
your consciousness and when you'd say
that the people you work with have that
experience I go like yeah I totally
believe that yeah I one of a
neuroscientist who's in one of the
courses their thesis was that when the
brain is has a whole bunch of new
channels being created the visual field
that isn't prioritized anymore which is
why there's so so much there's so much
visual distortion or whatever
hallucinations so I thought that was an
interesting one
yeah neurologically speaking again one
of the things you know des cartes era if
you've read the book when he talks about
that we really basically make emotional
decisions it's a little more complex
than that as my understanding but that
our of our emotional Center goes away
that we see it'll take us like four
hours to decide where to have lunch and
I wonder yeah I wonder how do you how do
you feel like that relates to the
recovery of trauma if our
decision-making processes you know how
do you think that place
yeah I think this is how we build we
need our emotions to be our pilots not
make atomic size your emotions become
defied us to keep sending you back into
the terminal direction so you need to
actually squash that pilots for a while
so you can not make a decision you know
and and that you just love stuff to come
in and that's my having a loving and
extremely skillful guide is so important
really important because you're so
vulnerable to part but if if you can
really let go I know with psychedelics
and without then new stuff comes in a
can be organized about it absolutely
yeah on the psychedelic research that
I've done there's one there basically of
the big five it can change openness
that's they've done the studies that
show them and the big five it changes
openness have you found any modalities
that changed the neuroses aspect of the
big five anything we've been measured I
only have done I'm only doing MDMA
research ah and you know I'm a small
part is very large multi-site study and
so we I have a limited number of
subjects and and I can't see it
somebody's on the MDMA research in my
psychodrama work that I do which I'm not
doing research we should probably closer
to what you do possibly yes people do
become less neurotic yeah people come
less reactive they become less offended
by minor issues of other people because
I think it big the big issue is self
compassion yeah and just the German
research my name is Tania singer who has
done a lot of mindfulness research very
complicated extremely high quality
research and she came at the end that
mindfulness is only helpful if it leads
to self compassion yeah and so I don't
know to what degree the various
genetic agents or psychic mind-altering
substances increase self-compassion MDMA
certainly does yeah yeah but it don't
know how its house and there's Studies
on the psychodrama
do drama work on the on the neuroses
have you seen the studies that talk
about a nobody nobody I know see there's
a of course big issue in our culture is
that the but the study is the biology
and if he can put people motionless with
a head in a vise and put him in a
scanner we do real science but in our
culture the interest in mental processes
has basically disappeared yeah and so
well I say you know so but do I study I
study neurofeedback which is where we
can study neural traces
I studied psychedelics because there's a
drug et cetera etc but my favorite
clinical work is psycho drama and
there's no way in hell anybody's going
to give me a million dollars and take
did good do go psycho drama study right
[Music]
and so so another question that I have
for you is that there's a I've noticed
when I'm working with people in the long
term it's pretty rare but what happens
is they'll get they'll get to a place
where their people come to me or have
their lives pretty well together right
like half of the people or CEOs a lot of
good colleges but they'll the first year
or two might be getting themselves into
a place where they where the trauma
isn't really driving them anymore at any
kind of measurable level they the they
feel love they feel compassion for
themselves they feel a sense of oneness
and then and then something happens like
somewhere like six months after that
sometimes where it seems like they like
revert and sometimes for three or four
months deeply into something that's
even before I ever met them and they'll
go into this like they'll really go into
a sense of attachment issues where they
are not seeing the world clearly they
can even say it they can say I'm not
seeing the world clearly and then and
then when they pop out at the end of
that and it's a really touch and go
thing that I noticed but when they pop
out at the end of that like that they
all of a Center a far softer they like
that there it's like they have a aura
about them of just loving everybody that
comes around them research do you know
anything about that process or does it
seem yeah see no I think your survey
ssin is is a very important observation
and this is exactly the stuff that
people are not studying yeah so I hang
out with the internal family systems and
people yes and about dealing with parts
and I find it internal family systems
model a very indispensable model in some
ways maybe you used to use very similar
model summary in your mind so that
people are built of parts and different
parts I control at different times and
when a part that has been managing you
successfully like to not ever feel
vulnerable or to never feel dependence
yes yeah never give control of the solid
that manager is going to scream like
crazy like no I'm not going to make
myself founder man
and so since thing he talked about it
house of phase because as an individual
therapist I don't see that I don't see
so much as a phased and my practice I
see but they see these things coming up
very much like no I'm not going to love
you or anybody else I'm not going to
give up part of my work in order to be
with my kids because I need to be
invulnerable yeah okay that's I'm not
gonna give up control and then I think
the trick is to
to really validate that parts right and
how important that part is being you
survived had same man that partners
really allows you to to survive all this
stuff it's so importance love that part
of you even though everybody else may
hate us and then after it's validated
and it's very important to to my mind to
really validate how how useful that
parties in help you to have become a
relative independent person and to say
to say this very good part and maybe you
can sort of change the job description
little bit yeah yeah yeah yeah it's
interesting it feels to me it's almost
fractal like that that exact process
happens at different scales through the
like I would say almost everything that
we do and our work is about learning to
love the different aspects of ourselves
and yeah and the more usually the ones
that are like the the ones at the very
base of the personality the ones that
are like hardly visible at the beginning
of a process the ones that seem to have
like that big hiccup near like near the
later stages of it like the biggest yeah
is there any researchers or anybody who
focuses on on that kind of core I don't
know I didn't see so see you know the
mind has disappeared some research yeah
yeah you know it's a real very big deal
you know and I would say if you have
living there in that part of California
this basically sends off the world these
days and bossy used to be a sense of the
broken now you guys in the sense of the
world and men talk to talk to other
people who have access to money and
research like we need to study these
mind process we need to study this part
there are things I can't Alex
because that brain scans everybody
because the brain is basically built on
BET models and be human these are weird
symbolic species and we live by symbols
and are symbols cannot be captured in
these brain scans
I love brain scans done more than but
you know at the end these mental
processes are what makes us do unique
human beasts if you are and we are not
studying it yeah absolutely yeah that's
and because we're not selling it you do
your work and it sounds really fantastic
and other people do their work but there
is no common language because there's no
common scientific or a conceptual
framework by which we all work together
we should yeah one of the things I'm
curious about in all those modalities
because you you've been able to go
around the world and and see a lot of
them the this modality that we that were
using is comes from a lot of those but
it also has a strong sense of the
spiritual the from Christianity to
Buddhism to Taoism to that the Sufis
like a lot of those practices we use as
well and I was wondering here how how
much of the the work that you see out
there that's really having a deep effect
on on that early trauma is also using
some of these practices because I know
you mentioned yoga and mindless yeah
well you know all these practices have
been have evolved out of helping people
to deal with their pain yeah and so you
know very simple thing I'd like to talk
about is that chanting is universal now
even in the Dutch Reformed Church that I
grew up in which the most lugubrious
Church you can imagine people still go
yeah so County together
however however I'm beautiful maybe
still gives you a sense of community and
of course at the core of human beings
you need to be communal yeah we need to
be in sync with other people and so that
is of course at the end you cannot avoid
that going there yeah yeah cuz that's
our nature how do we how do you get a
sense of belonging how do we get the
sense of being in touch with each other
how can you be an old person and commune
with a young person unless that larger
reality gets somebody incorporated into
yourself yeah it's one of the things
that we'll do in a in our week-long
courses right from the beginning the
whole week-long course is about looking
at the voice in our head and
particularly the abusive reoccurring
voice in our head and laying it out in a
way and then approaching it and how
figuring out how to have different
relationships with it not getting rid of
it but learning to love it learning to
let and we'll have a full list on the
wall everybody will list their voice in
the head in a way that they can't get
it's like very clear and one of the
things that seems to happen there
doesn't seem to I know it happens is
when people have excavate all this stuff
and then they look around the room and
they see 11 other people loving them
despite of this but then that's no
excuse not to love yourself it does
something for the for the human
absolutely yeah one of the questions I
have is how big how big of a process to
you or how important do you think it is
to actually just like it's it's big and
a to where you're just yeah
owning these things that you don't like
about yourself just that simple act how
important yes process is that you think
it's it's huge because it's this do is
with shame of course mm-hmm hiding
yourself is a shame yes anybody - no
that's not about you and indeed in order
to
fully become yourself the dark part you
yourself in the nasty part of yourself
need to be out there and to be realized
that we all carry does suffer out and
that is we could come just pretty
projected on Mitch McConnell and because
we all have a little bit of that in
ourselves also it's a like know part of
me is also nasty and very important and
to put it out here and say every part of
me is is there and every part needs to
be known to the people who I feel close
to yeah yeah exactly
um one of the most common questions in
the list of questions so we took all the
questions from people and then I'm
asking as many other as I can because
that seemed to make it most simple the
one of the biggest questions was people
wanted to know what was the personal
practice not not going to a therapist
not going into a group practice what was
the personal practices that you found
most effective at healing trauma should
I hate answering so I imagine well I can
tell you it's been helpful for me along
the road you know and some of it was
professional someone was not
professional I think one of the most
helpful things that I ever got was
roofing yeah you know I was a very sick
child and so I was born at the end of
the second world war in the Netherlands
and about half of my generation died of
starvation and so I was a very sickly
little kid and they don't feel that in
myself anymore but I grew up having a
body that was very defensive and and I
think I was stuck in that body in a way
and then I got lost I think the no
mental process whatsoever I mean that's
very very issue of is it organizational
and now it's not all additional yeah
yeah it was not even my list my body
something is
open up my body you know and and love my
chest to open up with you stand big and
to not be always frozen eternally was
extraordinarily helpful for me so that
is very important I think my yoga
practice which is not doing so well
these days was enormously helpful in the
rough times my type just going through
yoga practice having a practice and
finding finding your core and worked
very hard in this bus just enormously
helpful again non-relational yes know
the voice of your yoga teacher is
terribly important but nothing about
yoga teachers knew me as oppression yeah
but still and a lot of pizza really get
in touch with myself and to take care of
myself in a certain secret way so
there's a very important things and on a
professional level dealing with my parts
is enormously importance and the shame
you feel and it's a very big thing that
you know I saw both in my patients
myself is that you know trauma is one
thing but the biggest thing about trauma
is hating the role that you played in
your own trauma
yeah not standing up for yourself or you
getting along sucking up to your abuser
or you know and so you hate yourself for
not having be true to yourself at that
point you to trauma you need to go there
yeah I really feel that figure all the
five year olds a 15 year old a 50 year
old yeah yeah you work hours and and you
can understand that because you're
really scared and so you need to go
there and really deal with the parts of
you that you really despise yeah and you
know and you cannot do that for me can
you travel do you want oh you have to
love me more because yeah now I find
that that's a that it's like a watershed
moment and healing
certain pattern in a human is that they
there's a moment where they grieve the
fact that they've been doing this to
themselves or they've been agreeing to
this for the last 20 or 30 years and the
big 50 years there's eight years and
that much yet missed yeah and yeah and
that that is often the precursor to
loving themselves and let me not aspect
yeah is that grief I think usually you
know I see a lot of people so quite late
in life when they finally start taking
themselves seriously due to work and
they go like oh man I miss so much
also but at least I have a few good
years left to make use of oh speaking of
this so I did a lot of work in
philanthropy with early childhood we did
mindfulness in schools and we did the
the emotional the body part of it
emotional fluidity practice with kids
called hand-in-hand parenting which is
amazing for anybody and what I noticed
is that my experience I'm wondering if
there's research or if your experience
is the same that huh trauma heals a lot
quicker the younger they are when the
neurology is still plastic it seems like
there's a oh absolutely there's no
question about it okay like no I suggest
but say you get them get you're getting
you know and there's you know and push
Perry writes a lot about it like if you
get people the first year of life you
know you can change everything and the
longer you wait and then a study shows
the longer you wait the harder it is and
it doesn't mean it's ever too late but
no we really talk about you from your
philanthropy my reaction is isn't it
great that you're doing that and and
there's a lot of philanthropy going on
schools did you know I see but it never
becomes part of the school system yeah
it's always exterior you know so my
dream is that every kid in America yes
five hours reading writing arithmetic
and self-regulation yeah starting in
kindergarten
regulation and taking care of yourself
becomes a core of the curriculum because
you need to have that in order to become
a productive member of society
it's not like it oh let's let's get
these nice people from California to
fund this yoga program
no I kids need it like it yeah we at
some point we can talk not offline but
and we our experience was that if you go
you had to go to the teachers not to the
school system absolutely and we when we
when we did that we could scale with a
half a million dollars we can scale to
like 700,000 kids doing mine up and so
that we found a business model that
allowed us to reach a ton of people
through the school system very cheaply
but offline at some point I don't think
we would I think we bore look good I
[Music]
guess they the question that I have is
if it to be political for a second aces
like if we as a society have the
moonshot of reducing aces right which is
adverse childhood experiences for those
but which we know is linked to
everything from drug addiction rates to
heart disease rates to mental illness
rates if we were to do that two
questions one we needed to do as a
society to get there a to make that a
priority in your mind and two what would
be the back of your napkin plan for or
for what would be the most important
first steps to take in reducing aces in
our society well it's interesting
because it made small meeting recently
in which Jim Carroll also said you know
much of politics should be an
educational process
and when we have questions debates at
the base about politics to make Asus
good aces where it should be
namely our biggest national priority
like it's the biggest source of mental
illness biggest source of opioid
addiction biggest source of everything
and talking a bigger friend biggest
drain on our economy
exactly you know and one of the
disappointing things about the Obama
administration is that they did not go
there and they did more of let's compete
with kids in Finland and Denmark who
score myself much better than our kids
do why did I score much better because
the societies actually no but aces had
taken taken into account and set up
school systems where the Aces are
addressing is at the court and we should
make it our national debate if you treat
your kids well they will be curious they
will be eager to learn there will be
eager to get along with other people
because they feel safe and it's like
it's a big gigantic educational project
project which sort of goes against the
capitalist mentality of let's make as
much money as we can so that's not only
true for politics it's also true for the
medical system when people also are not
doing it to give us lip service to it
but they don't do it and so there needs
to be a pervasive and I think the best
way of doing it is in school systems I
think can get on the state-by-state
basis get to accept the for our idea
that self regulation gets taught from
the very first moment on and get a bunch
of people to teach and that's the way to
do tapping that region your breathing
that singing and we do yoga and we do so
i DRA mer and we do all this stuff all
the stuff actually that my kids cause
it's cool because I'm a bellof person SM
sorry able to send my kids to the school
when they go all that stuff and
certainly you get the whole again the
income inequality saying now the poorer
you are the less of the stuff you get
and then where you get blamed for not
being able to function yeah
so that should be a big part of the
national debates and to really talk
about how but of course there's an
enormous what's happening our current
political system of course it's just
stunning we're on the mind the time is
thing big under buy any of the stuff
like no we're not do any of this in fact
we go to make the worst broke into a
worse place and I think when people
address that they are not quite
articulate enough like no why would you
want to destroy everything that's good
about us and to really bring that issue
up we need to be safe license to be
predictable and to make a continuous
refrain in response to everything that
we do a basic yeah um thank you
another question we talked a little bit
before this started of how it was really
important for you to keep your
one-on-one practice because it yeah a
certain level of humility whereas when
you're talking and you've written a book
everybody looks at you like you have
answers and then you're working with
somebody one-on-one and like the
humanity and the reality of life sets in
I'm wondering how um one can you just
talk a little bit about the importance
for you of that humility and and to what
for those because there's quite a few
people on the call that are that are
facilitators or coaches or can you also
just speak to the importance and how you
how you do it how you maintain that
practice because my experience is that
when we do that it makes a huge
difference so well one thing I really
get accused of humility no I wouldn't
even call humility but I would call it
like curiosity is circulation it's an
issue and so I would hate to know
everything because then there's nothing
else to be discovered yeah and so why do
I have a practice and why do I take all
kind of different people my practice is
because I want to be challenged in
but I do I had a t-shirt at one point
though expect a guy in Boston who then
became a administrator of a large
Hospital I said but did you take this
job he says personally you know at
certain point you have seen it all and
every be patient becomes like a
predictable entity and I got like wow
that's weird
is never happened to me and now I'm 76
years old it still is not happening to
me and I find every person who walks in
my office a unique individual the unique
capacity so that uniqueness and finding
out how everybody has different
adaptation and different issues and that
one size doesn't fit all
yes no I couldn't do without you you
know I couldn't just put my little
template and everybody said it works for
everybody and I'm actually so I'm
incredibly intrigued with all the
different solutions that people find for
having Delphis what they deal with and I
hope it and where I know we'll continue
to be this curious till the day you die
like yeah and on your personal journey
where do you find your edge of your own
development process where are you now at
your own edge if you're willing you know
the big issue at my age is death yeah
you know being relevant and possibly
confronting the fact that you may not be
relevant to a larger world at some point
because of course you get spoiled at
some point and people take you seriously
and then I've found this first by kids
about 15 years ago my kids started to
treat me like an old man then let me do
it for you there's I mean like now it's
our turn now and and I think the reality
is that people need to come into their
own and they need to abandon you at some
point and whether you did or our life
does Mark think of the difference
because they'll remember you as his eye
rather than as a person who is actively
active and that's of course is saying
that is a real issue to come to terms
with its to just to give up being a
person who who is not there to move
things around most striking business
yeah
what pleasure do you find in that new
identity that's coming online pleasure
yeah pleasure
it's you know it's very key that it's
something to be dealt with
like do I keep my yoga practice going or
do I love to myself to become a buffalo
longer know it like it takes more and
more energy to do things and what point
do you accept your limitations I don't
at the first the first offers I ever had
some patience so clearly a very messed
up person broke on the bathroom mirror
in soap live with live at the acceptance
of your limitations or the pain of your
transgressions I thought it was pretty
good actually yeah and so learning to
live with the exception of your
limitations is also very Britain issue
yeah Frank the pleasure will no I cannot
say all right well this was our time I
really appreciate thank you do you have
any questions really or any em or
anything else to say that we have it
that I forgot anything important as you
have the probably did anyway so real
pleasure talking with you as a pleasure
at the really see so in fear about
wonderful work you're doing El Sordo
City it's great to you yeah thank you
it's a privilege thank you I feel it
thank you okay